Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
two of our three-part mini-series on
unusual characters from World War I.
In part one, we learned about the British
army officer who fought alongside Arabian
tribes, T.E. Lawrence, or Lawrence
of Arabia, as he was better known.
In part three, the next episode,
we’ll learn about Manfred von
Richthofen, the so-called Red Baron.
And in today’s episode, we will be
talking about Mata Hari, the Dutch exotic
dancer accused of being a German spy.
It is an amazing story of luxury, poverty,
seduction, spycraft, betrayal, and more.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
The 15th of October 1917
was a particularly cold and
frosty morning in Paris.
The sun was just starting to come up.
Earlier that morning, a 41-year-old
woman had been dragged from
her cell in Paris’ Saint Lazare
prison and bustled into a car.
She was driven a few kilometres
east, to the castle at Vincennes.
She was frogmarched out of the
car and taken to a secluded area
of the castle grounds, where
she was placed against a pole.
A prison guard attempted to put a
bandage over her eyes; she refused it.
She looked straight at the men
pointing their rifles at her.
Similarly, she refused
for her hands to be tied.
She knew the fate that awaited her.
She would meet it head on.
One account even has her blowing kisses
at the men, one last performance for a
woman who had lived her life on the stage.
The men pulled their triggers, and
she fell to the floor in a heap.
Her body, this body that had played no
small part in making her one of the most
famous and desirable women in Europe, was
sent to the Paris medical school to be
used as dissection practice by students.
This was the fate of Mata Hari, a woman
once called "arguably the greatest
female spy of the 20th century."
Now, to understand how things came to
this and, indeed, to answer the question
of whether she was even a spy, we need
to go all the way back to the start.
She was born Margaretha Zelle in 1876
in Leeuwarden, in the Netherlands.
Her father was a rich man, and
owned a successful hat business.
Her early life was one of affluence and
luxury; She was taught the piano, she
took dance lessons, she learned multiple
languages, and she went to a fancy school.
But when she was 13 years old,
things came crashing down.
Her father had made some speculative,
and clearly very bad, investments
in the oil industry and was
forced to declare bankruptcy.
Her parents divorced, and
her mother died a year later.
The young Margaretha was sent
to live with an uncle in a small
town nearby, and encouraged to
train to become a school teacher.
But the life of a small-town
schoolteacher was somewhat
different to what she had in mind.
She was confident, outgoing, and not
particularly good at following the rules.
She was also developing into
a beautiful young woman.
Tall, striking, with dark brown
hair and almost East Asian features,
she naturally drew attention.
At the teacher-training school,
she caught the eye of the school
principal, a middle-aged man
whose behaviour, by most accounts,
crossed inappropriate boundaries.
What exactly happened remains unclear—some
say she flirted back, others that she was
simply caught up in his advances—but the
result was the same: she was caught in a
compromising situation, a scandal erupted,
and she was soon removed from the school.
Seeking adventure, or at least seeking
anything that might take her away
from the small Dutch town in which she
felt suffocated, one day her eyes were
drawn to an advert in a newspaper.
It was from a 38-year-old wealthy army
captain who was looking for a wife.
Without much to lose, the 18-year-old
Margaretha Zelle answered, and within a
week, the pair were engaged to be married.
His name was Rudolf MacLeod, and
almost immediately, they went back
to the Dutch East Indies–modern day
Indonesia–where MacLeod was stationed.
Although the young Margaretha might
have felt that she was finally free
and off on a wonderful adventure, her
marriage was unhappy from the outset.
MacLeod was hot-tempered,
jealous and alcoholic.
He wanted his wife to stay at home, appear
at social events only when he approved
them, and be a good little colonial wife
who obeyed her husband’s every wish.
Margaretha, now Margaretha
MacLeod, had other ideas.
She thrived in the limelight, she
enjoyed the attention of the other
officers, she revelled in the exotic
nature of her new colonial life.
Both she and MacLeod had multiple
lovers, and it is here where
it gets a little unpleasant.
MacLeod caught syphilis,
which he passed to his wife.
The pair had had two children in
quick succession, a boy and a girl.
And shortly after the birth
of the second child, both of
their children became very ill.
And the boy, who was only
two years old, sadly died.
Now, the reason for the illness
and the poor boy’s death is
still not completely clear.
Magaretha and her husband said an angry
servant had poisoned them, and there
was even a rumour that a rival army
officer had poisoned the children’s food.
It seems more probable that
they got mercury poisoning.
At the time, toxic mercury was thought
to be a helpful treatment for syphilis,
and both children were passed syphilis
from their mother during pregnancy.
They were given mercury as a treatment
for the disease, but these mercury pills
most probably killed Margaretha’s son.
Distraught, they moved back to
the Netherlands, and the pair
separated on their return.
After the divorce was finalised,
Margaretha was legally awarded custody
of their daughter, but her violent,
alcoholic and abusive husband refused
to pay any form of child support.
Without any way of supporting herself
and her daughter financially, she
gave in, and sent her daughter
to go and live with her father.
Margaretha had now lost
not one but two children.
This was 1903, and she
was only 27 at the time.
She did what she would later say
she thought every runaway wife
did, and that was to go to Paris.
She had no connections, no money,
no nothing, but she was determined
to make something of herself.
Her primary concern at this point
was getting back on her feet and
getting into a situation that would
allow her to get her daughter back.
Initially, she tried more traditional
routes to earn a living: as a German
teacher, teaching the piano, even
working as a model in a department store.
It was a way to eke out a
living, but it was not enough.
She returned to the Netherlands, but there
she came to the realisation that she was
never going to get her daughter back.
Now, with all ties to her previous
life severed, she returns to Paris.
And it is here that she creates
the character she will become
known for: Mata Hari, which
means “eye of the day” in Malay.
In early 1905, she starts to perform this
exotic dance act in which she wears an
elaborate hairdress and exotic jewellery.
And not much else, I should
add, she was practically naked.
This dance routine, with the
stunningly beautiful Mata Hari,
was soon the talk of the town.
She created this aura of mystique.
The name, the jewellery, the music,
the explicit nature of the performance.
She was a master of what we would now
call PR, and she carefully curated her
image, feeding the press stories about
being a Javanese princess trained in the
ancient, sacred art of temple dancing.
It was, of course, nonsense;
she was Dutch, had never been
royalty, and her so-called sacred
dances were largely improvised,
she made them up there and then.
But nobody cared.
Or rather, it provided
a convenient excuse.
The men weren’t paying to see a
striptease; they weren’t paying to
watch a woman take her clothes off;
they were paying to witness some
fascinating exotic dance from the east.
Or at least, that’s what
people told themselves.
Audiences were mesmerised.
The more the newspapers wrote
about her, the more people
wanted to believe the fantasy.
She masterfully manipulated the press,
ensuring that stories about her were
printed in the biggest papers in Europe.
She cultivated journalists, gave
them juicy details, and let them
build the legend of Mata Hari.
And soon, it wasn’t just Paris.
She performed across Europe’s grandest
stages: at the Scala in Milan,
in Madrid, in Vienna, in Berlin.
Everywhere she went, she
was the centre of attention.
She was paid a reported 10,000 francs
per show, which is the equivalent
of around €40,000 in today’s money.
To state the obvious, this turned
her into a very wealthy woman, but
perhaps more importantly, and certainly
more importantly for the rest of
this story, it made her one of the
most sought-after women in Paris
She became the mistress of some of
the richest and most powerful men in
Europe: politicians, generals, diplomats.
She seemed to have a particular
preference for men in the military.
And her lovers showered her with diamonds,
fur coats, and lavish apartments.
She was no longer Margaretha
Zelle, the poor Dutch girl, or
Margaretha MacLeod, divorcée.
She was Mata Hari, the most
desired woman in Europe.
But fame is fleeting, and by the
early 1910s, she had somewhat fallen
out of favour, as a dancer at least.
There were younger women doing a
similar thing, and Mata Hari found
herself leaning more on her wealthy
lovers than on her dancing career.
And then in 1914, everything changed.
When war broke out, the world of glamour
and excess vanished almost overnight.
Suddenly, being an international
woman with connections to powerful men
in multiple countries, men who were
now officers in an enemy army, was
not intriguing in a good way; it was
intriguing in a very bad way indeed.
Spymania broke out in France, with
authorities monitoring anyone who
they believed might have links
to foreign powers and who might
be tempted to pass along secrets.
And Mata Hari soon realised she would
be a prime target for such advances.
In 1915, when in The Hague, she was
approached by a German official.
He offered her 20,000 francs—a
huge sum—for information on
French military movements.
Her code name was to be H21.
Mata Hari accepted the
money, saying, “Sure thing”.
But whether she actually intended on
passing on any secrets is up for debate.
According to most historians,
she had no intention of doing so.
She took the money, just as
she had always taken money
from men who offered it to her.
Perhaps she considered it a
kind of severance package.
She had been in Germany when war
was declared, and large amounts of
her property had been confiscated,
so this was one way to make up
for it, in her mind at least.
And in any case, she had spent the past
10 years accepting large sums of money
from men on the understanding that
she might do something in the future.
Why should this be any different?
But once she had accepted the
money, the line was blurred.
The Germans now had her on record
as accepting money from them.
And whether she meant to spy
or not, that receipt of payment
would later be used against her.
Now, this was in 1915, and shortly
after, something happened to her
that had never happened before.
She fell in love.
Yes, she'd been married, and she
had had many lovers who had no doubt
declared their love for her, but it
wasn’t until she met a young Russian
officer, 20 years her junior, that
she ever felt quite the same way.
His name was Vladimir de Masloff.
Shortly after they met, he was
sent to the front lines and was
badly wounded, losing an eye.
Desperate to see him and ensure
he was safe, she needed permission
to travel, and that required a
favour from the French military.
It was at this moment that French
intelligence saw their opportunity.
Although they didn’t know about
the meeting with the German and her
acceptance of the 20,000 francs, they
had been watching her like a hawk.
She spoke multiple languages, travelled
around Europe, had many military officers
as lovers, and was prepared to bend the
rules of society, for a fee of course.
She ticked all the boxes the
French authorities had for
“characteristics of a spy”.
So, when she arrived at the French
intelligence agency to ask for a permit
to go and visit her wounded Russian
lover, she was surprised to find the
head of French counterintelligence,
Georges Ladoux, make her an offer.
He asked her if she was interested
in becoming a spy for France.
Her role would be to travel to Belgium,
seduce German army officers, find
valuable information about German military
plans, and pass these back to France.
Various sums were discussed.
Mata Hari negotiated and was offered a
reported one million francs, something
like 4 million Euros in today’s money.
The fee would be paid on the
successful completion of the mission.
She needed the money, and this could
be her “last hurrah”, her opportunity
to marry her Russian lover and set
herself up for life, without ever
having to worry about money again.
She accepted Ladoux’s offer.
But importantly, she never told him
about accepting the 20,000 Francs
from the Germans a year beforehand.
This would come back to bite her.
She tried to get to Belgium to
get started on her task, but
found herself caught up in Spain.
She tried to contact Ladoux for
instructions on how to proceed,
but never received a response.
Taking matters into her own hands,
and keen to get the job done so she
could be paid, she found a German army
officer in Madrid, and seduced him.
In a bid to get him to reveal
information, she told him that she was
a German spy and her code name was H21.
He then sends a telegram back to
the German intelligence service,
letting them know that he has made
contact with Agent H21 and informing
them about what she has told him.
But, and here's where things start
to get a little complicated, he
sends the telegram in a code that
he almost certainly knows the French
have cracked, suggesting that he
wants her identity to be discovered.
Sure enough, the French intercept the
telegram, decrypt the letter, and read
the extensive descriptions of “agent H21”.
Unmistakably, it is Mata Hari.
On her return to Paris, in
February 1917, she was arrested.
She was interrogated for months, held
in the grim Saint-Lazare prison, and
subjected to intense questioning.
The trial was a show trial.
She was accused of being responsible
for the deaths of 50,000 French
soldiers—despite zero concrete
evidence that she had ever
passed on a single useful secret.
The press, once her
ally, turned against her.
Her life as a dancer and a courtesan,
her divorce, her promiscuous lifestyle,
this was all used as proof of guilt.
In her prime, she had used the press
to build up her image, knowing that
the story she told was more important
than the veracity of its details.
Now, the press used exactly the same
avoidance of the truth to tear her down.
She was found guilty of
espionage and sentenced to death.
And so we return to that cold morning in
October 1917, in the castle of Vincennes.
She was marched to the pole,
refusing the blindfold, staring
her executioners in the eye.
The executioners fired, she fell to
the floor, and her body was sent to
be chopped up by medical students.
It is now more than 100 years since
her death, and there are still plenty
of question marks as to whether
this woman, named by her accusers as
“the greatest female spy of the 20th
century”, ever did any spying at all.
Yes, she accepted money, but there is no
evidence that she passed any information.
And if she was a spy,
she was a very bad one.
She never attempted to hide
her encounters, she never
wrote in code, everything she
did, she did in plain sight.
Indeed, on the 100th anniversary of her
death, in 2017, the French government
released a bunch of new evidence about
her life and trial, which seemed to
confirm what many had long suspected.
She was a useful scapegoat.
France was not doing well in the war, and
if you could point the finger at a woman
who had lived outside of the norms of
society, a woman who looked and behaved
like a spy, well, she made an easy target.
In fact, you have already met the
real spy earlier in this episode,
someone who perhaps was a lot
more of a spy than Mata Hari.
George Ladoux, the head of the
French Intelligence agency and the
man who tricked and then arrested
Mata Hari, was himself arrested on
the charge of being a double agent.
After the war was over, the charges
were quietly dropped, and he lived
the rest of his life a free man.
Mata Hari was not quite so lucky.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on Mata Hari, the exotic dancer,
courtesan, and most probably not a spy.
As a reminder, this is part two
of a three-part mini-series on
unusual characters from World War I.
In the last episode, we had Lawrence of
Arabia, and next up we will have Manfred
von Richthofen, the dead-eye German
pilot better known as The Red Baron.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.